Add lerna-linker explanation to website (#48)
comunica/website: pages/docs/2_modify/advanced/extending_local_version_comunica.md

---

> title: 'Using Local Changes to Base Comunica in Comunica Extensions'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Linking Comunica development environment to other projects
```

> description: 'Guide on how to extend a local version of Comunica or use a local version of Comunica with an existing extension'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Guide on how to use a local development version of Comunica with another local project'
```

---

> Various  [extensions](https://comunica.dev/docs/modify/extensions/) of Comunica exist. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various [extensions](https://comunica.dev/docs/modify/extensions/) of Comunica exist. 
```

> Various  [extensions](https://comunica.dev/docs/modify/extensions/) of Comunica exist. 

Reviewer: This is a good motivation for linking indeed, but I would suggest adding a sentence before saying that it may be required to link comunica to another project (in general). Linking to a comunica extension is one good example where this is valuable, but it may also be necessary to link a dev-version of comunica into other projects, in which case this same method can be used.

Reviewer: Also emphasize in the description that this approach does not require publishing anything to npm.
So it's useful for testing things _before_ they are published.

These extensions utilize packages from the [base Comunica](https://github.com/comunica/comunica) framework and add additional packages or engine configurations. 
When working on local changes to the base Comunica and needing to use these changes in an extension, you must link your local development version of Comunica with your extension project.
This page introduces some methods to achieve this, though other methods are possible.

## Lerna-linker

Lerna-linker is a script designed to facilitate package linking in a Lerna monorepo. It iterates over all packages, executing `yarn unlink` and `yarn link` on each. It then saves all linked packages and runs `yarn link <package>` for each linked package in the Comunica extension.

### Installation

Install the script globally using the following:

```bash

> $ npm install -g lerna-linker

Reviewer: Could you also add some simple docs to the readme of this package?
And also a link from npm to your github repo.

```

### Usage

> Assume the local version of Comunica is located at `path/to/comunica` and the extension at `path/to/comunica-extension`.

Reviewer: To keep it general:
```suggestion
Assume the local version of Comunica is located at `path/to/comunica` and the extension at `path/to/my-project`.
```

1. Link Source Packages by navigating to the base Comunica directory and running:

 ```bash 
    $ cd path/to/comunica
    $ lerna-linker linkSource 
 ```

 This command links all packages in the base repository.
2. Link source packages to target by moving to the Comunica extension directory and running:

 ```bash
    $ cd path/to/comunica-extension
    $ lerna-linker linkTarget
 ```

 This command links the base Comunica packages to the extension.

3. Undo Linking of the base Comunica packages by navigating to the Comunica extension directory and running:
 ```bash
    $ cd path/to/comunica-extension
    $ lerna-linker unlinkTarget
 ```

>  This command will unlink the base Comunica packages from the extension.

Reviewer: Is a `npm install` or `yarn install` needed after this step to restore the project to a workable state?

> By following these steps, you can effectively manage local changes to the base Comunica framework and ensure they are utilized within your extensions. Note that linking multiple different development versions simultaneously does not work, as running `$ lerna-linker linkSource` will overwrite all previously made links.

Reviewer: Let's put this note in an actual note, e.g.:

```
<div class="note">
This guide discusses querying over Linked Data on the Web, exposed via URLs.
<a href="/docs/query/getting_started/query_cli_file/">Click here to query over local RDF files</a> instead.
</div>
```

> ---

Reviewer: Could you rename the file to `linking_local_version.md` ?

---

In cases where a local development version of Comunica is consumed as a dependency of another project, linking the local development version of Comunica to the project is required.

For example, various extensions of Comunica exist. These extensions utilize packages from the base Comunica framework and add additional packages or engine configurations. When working on local changes to base Comunica and needing to use these changes in an extension, you must link the local development version of  Comunica with the extension project. This page introduces a method to achieve this, though other methods are possible.

This method does not require publishing the development version of Comunica to NPM, thus it is useful for testing changes before they are made public.

## Lerna-linker

Lerna-linker is a script designed to facilitate package linking in a Lerna monorepo. It iterates over all packages, executing `yarn unlink` and `yarn link` on each. It then saves all linked packages and runs `yarn link <package>` for each linked package in the Comunica extension.

### Installation

Install the script globally using the following:

```bash

> $ npm install -g lerna-linker

Reviewer: The npm readme currently says that it's used to link a local comunica version.
Does this mean it's hardcoded to comunica? Or does it also work for other monorepos?
If the latter, I'd make this more generic in the readme.

Author: It was hardcoded for comunica due to looking for all packages starting with "@", but I changed it and the README to be more general.
